.. include:: ../common.rst

.. qnum::
   :prefix: 7-2-
   :start: 1

|Time45|



ArrayList Methods
=========================

.. index::
   pair: arraylist; size
   pair: arraylist; add
   pair: arraylist; get
   pair: arraylist; set
   pair: arraylist; remove

.. |AP CSA Reference Sheet| raw:: html

   <a href="https://apstudents.collegeboard.org/ap/pdf/ap-computer-science-a-java-quick-reference_0.pdf" target="_blank">AP CSA Java Quick Reference Sheet</a>

The following are the ``ArrayList`` methods that you need to know for the AP CSA
exam. These are included on the |AP CSA Reference Sheet| that you will receive
during the exam so you do not need to memorize them. The E in the method headers
below stands for the type of the element in the ArrayList; this type E can be
any Object type. We will look at how these methods work below.

-  **int size()** returns the number of elements in the list

-  **boolean add(E obj)** appends obj to the end of the list and returns true

-   **E remove(int index)** removes the item at the index and shifts remaining items to the left (to a lower index)

-  **void add(int index, E obj)**  moves any current objects at index or beyond to the right (to a higher index) and inserts obj at the index

-   **E get(int index)** returns the item in the list at the index

-   **E set(int index, E obj)** replaces the item at index with obj

``size()``
----------

.. index::
   pair: arraylist; size

As we saw in the last lesson, you can get the number of items in a ``ArrayList``
using its ``size()`` method. The ``ArrayList`` starts out empty with a size
of 0.

.. code-block:: java

    ArrayList<String> list = new ArrayList<String>();
    System.out.println( list.size() );

.. note::

   With arrays, you use the ``length`` field to get the number of items in the
   array. But, with an ``ArrayList`` you use the ``size()`` method to get the
   number of items in the ``ArrayList``. You will not be penalized if you mix up
   ``length`` and ``size()`` in the CSA exam. The number of items in an empty
   ``ArrayList`` is 0.

``add(obj)``
------------

.. index::
   pair: arraylist; add

You can add values to an ``ArrayList`` using the method ``add(obj)`` which will
add the object to the end of the list, just like you would join the end of the
line to board a bus.

|CodingEx| **Coding Exercise**

.. activecode:: listAdd1
   :language: java
   :autograde: unittest

   Run the code below to see how the list changes as each object is added to the
   end. Notice that we added the same string to the list more than once. Lists
   can hold duplicate objects. Can you add your name to the list and then print
   out the list?

   ~~~~
   import java.util.*; // import all classes in this package.

   public class listAdd1
   {
       public static void main(String[] args)
       {
           ArrayList<String> nameList = new ArrayList<String>();
           nameList.add("Diego");
           System.out.println(nameList);
           nameList.add("Grace");
           System.out.println(nameList);
           nameList.add("Diego");
           System.out.println(nameList);
           System.out.println(nameList.size());
       }
   }

   ====
   import static org.junit.Assert.*;

   import org.junit.*;

   import java.io.*;

   public class RunestoneTests extends CodeTestHelper
   {
       public RunestoneTests()
       {
           super("listAdd1");
       }

       @Test
       public void test1()
       {
           String output = getMethodOutput("main");
           String expect = "[Diego, Grace, Diego, Your name]";
           String searchString = "\\[Diego, Grace, Diego, [A-Za-z0-9 '-,]+\\]";

           String[] lines = output.split("\n");
           String longest = lines[0];
           for (int i = 0; i < lines.length; i++)
           {
               if (lines[i].length() > longest.length())
               {
                    longest = lines[i];
               }
           }

           boolean passed = output.matches("[\\s\\S]+" + searchString + "[\\s\\S]*");

           passed = getResults(expect, longest, "Add your name to the list", passed);
           assertTrue(passed);
       }
   }

.. index::
   pair: list; autoboxing
   pair: list; unboxing

When adding Integer objects to the list, you can use the Integer constructor
like ``add(new Integer(5))`` in Java version 7 which is used on the exam
(although this is deprecated and no longer used in Java version 9) or you can
just add the int value directly like ``add(5)`` in any Java version and it will
be changed into an ``Integer`` object automatically. This is called
**autoboxing**. When you pull an ``int`` value out of a list of ``Integers``
that is called **unboxing**.

.. code-block:: java

    ArrayList<Integer> list = new ArrayList<Integer>();
    list.add(new Integer(5)); // this will only work in Java 7
    list.add(5); // this will work in all Java versions

You can put any kind of objects into an ``ArrayList``. Even instances of a class
that you wrote. For example, here is an ``ArrayList`` of ``Student``\ s.

.. activecode:: StudentArrayList
  :language: java
  :autograde: unittest

  An example of an ``ArrayList`` of ``Student`` objects. Add a new student with
  your name and info in it.

  ~~~~
  import java.util.*;

  public class StudentList
  {
      // main method for testing
      public static void main(String[] args)
      {
          ArrayList<Student> roster = new ArrayList<Student>();
          roster.add(new Student("Skyler", "skyler@sky.com", 123456));
          roster.add(new Student("Ayanna", "ayanna@gmail.com", 789012));

          System.out.println(roster);
      }
  }

  class Student
  {
      private String name;
      private String email;
      private int id;

      public Student(String initName, String initEmail, int initId)
      {
          name = initName;
          email = initEmail;
          id = initId;
      }

      // toString() method
      public String toString()
      {
          return id + ": " + name + ", " + email;
      }
  }

  ====
  import static org.junit.Assert.*;

  import org.junit.*;

  import java.io.*;

  public class RunestoneTests extends CodeTestHelper
  {
      public RunestoneTests()
      {
          super("StudentList");
      }

      @Test
      public void test1()
      {
          String output = getMethodOutput("main");
          String expect = "[123456: Skyler, skyler@sky.com, 789012: Ayanna, ayanna@gmail.com]";

          boolean passed = getResults(expect, output, "main()", true);
          assertTrue(passed);
      }
  }

``add(index,obj)``
------------------

There are actually two different ``add`` methods in the ``ArrayList`` class. The
``add(obj)`` method adds the passed object to the end of the list. The
``add(index,obj)`` method adds the passed object at the passed index, but first
moves over any existing values to higher indices to make room for the new
object.

|CodingEx| **Coding Exercise**

.. activecode:: listAddInt2
   :language: java
   :autograde: unittest

   What will the code below print out? Try figuring it out before running it.
   Remember that ``ArrayList``\ s start at index 0 and that the add(index,obj) always
   has the index as the first argument.

   ~~~~
   import java.util.*; // import all classes in this package.

   public class listAddInt2
   {
       public static void main(String[] arts)
       {
           ArrayList<Integer> list1 = new ArrayList<Integer>();
           list1.add(1);
           System.out.println(list1);
           // adds the number 2 to the end of the list
           list1.add(2);
           System.out.println(list1);
           // This will add the number 3 at index 1
           list1.add(1, 3);
           System.out.println(list1);
           // This will add the number 4 at index 1
           list1.add(1, 4);
           System.out.println(list1);
           System.out.println(list1.size());
       }
   }

   ====
   import static org.junit.Assert.*;

   import org.junit.*;

   import java.io.*;

   public class RunestoneTests extends CodeTestHelper
   {
       public RunestoneTests()
       {
           super("listAddInt2");
       }

       @Test
       public void test1()
       {
           String output = getMethodOutput("main");
           String expect = "[1]\n[1, 2]\n[1, 3, 2]\n[1, 4, 3, 2]\n4\n";

           boolean passed = getResults(expect, output, "main()", true);
           assertTrue(passed);
       }
   }

.. note::

    ``ArrayList``\ s like arrays start numbering their elements from 0.

|Exercise| **Check your understanding**

.. mchoice:: qalAdd1
   :answer_a: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
   :answer_b: [1, 4, 2, 3, 5]
   :answer_c: [1, 2, 4, 3, 5]
   :answer_d: [1, 2, 4, 5]
   :correct: c
   :feedback_a: This would be true if all the <code>add</code> method calls were <code>add(value)</code>, but at least one is not.
   :feedback_b: This would be true if it was <code>add(1, 4)</code>
   :feedback_c: The <code>add(2, 4)</code> will put the 4 at index 2, but first move the 3 to index 3.
   :feedback_d: This would be true if the <code>add(2, 4)</code> replaced what was at index 2, but it actually moves the value currently at index 2 to index 3.

   What will print when the following code executes?

   .. code-block:: java

      ArrayList<Integer> list1 = new ArrayList<Integer>();
      list1.add(1);
      list1.add(2);
      list1.add(3);
      list1.add(2, 4);
      list1.add(5);
      System.out.println(list1);

.. |Java visualizer 1| raw:: html

   <a href="http://cscircles.cemc.uwaterloo.ca/java_visualize/#code=import+java.util.*%3B%0A%0Apublic+class+ClassNameHere+%7B%0A+++public+static+void+main(String%5B%5D+args)+%7B%0A++++++%0A++++++List%3CInteger%3E+list1+%3D+new+ArrayList%3CInteger%3E()%3B%0A++++++list1.add(new+Integer(1))%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(2)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(new+Integer(3))%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(2,4)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(new+Integer(5))%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++%0A+++%7D%0A%7D&mode=display&curInstr=0" target="_blank">Java Visualizer</a>

You can step through the code above by clicking on this |Java Visualizer 1|.

.. mchoice:: qalAdd2
   :answer_a: ["Anaya", "Sarah", "Layla", "Sharrie"]
   :answer_b: ["Anaya", "Layla", "Sharrie", "Sarah"]
   :answer_c: ["Sarah", "Anaya", "Layla", "Sharrie"]
   :answer_d: ["Anaya", "Layla", "Sarah", "Sharrie"]
   :correct: a
   :feedback_a: The <code>add(1, "Sarah")</code> will move any current items to the right and then put "Sarah" at index 1.
   :feedback_b: This would be true if the last one was <code>add("Sarah")</code>
   :feedback_c: This would be true if the last one was <code>add(0, "Sarah")</code>
   :feedback_d: This would be true if the last one was <code>add(2, "Sarah")</code>

   What will print when the following code executes?

   .. code-block:: java

      ArrayList<String> list1 = new ArrayList<String>();
      list1.add("Anaya");
      list1.add("Layla");
      list1.add("Sharrie");
      list1.add(1, "Sarah");
      System.out.println(list1);

.. |Java visualizer 2| raw:: html

   <a href="http://cscircles.cemc.uwaterloo.ca/java_visualize/#code=import+java.util.*%3B%0A%0Apublic+class+ClassNameHere+%7B%0A+++public+static+void+main(String%5B%5D+args)+%7B%0A++++++%0A++++++List%3CString%3E+list1+%3D+new+ArrayList%3CString%3E()%3B%0A++++++list1.add(%22Anaya%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(%22Layla%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(%22Sharrie%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(1,+%22Sarah%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++%0A+++%7D%0A%7D&mode=display&curInstr=0" target="_blank">Java Visualizer</a>

You can step through the code above by clicking on the following |Java visualizer 2|.


``remove(index)``
-----------------

.. index::
   pair: arraylist; removing an item

You can also remove values from an ``ArrayList`` using the ``remove(index)``
method. It removes and returns the item at the given index. This will move all
the other items over in the underlying array and decrease the size of the
``ArrayList`` by 1.

|CodingEx| **Coding Exercise**



.. activecode:: listRem
   :language: java
   :autograde: unittest

   What will the following code print out? Try to guess before you run it. Were you surprised? Read the note below.
   ~~~~
   import java.util.*; // import all classes in this package.

   public class listRem
   {
       public static void main(String[] arts)
       {
           ArrayList<Integer> list1 = new ArrayList<Integer>();
           list1.add(1);
           list1.add(2);
           list1.add(3);
           System.out.println(list1);
           list1.remove(1);
           System.out.println(list1);
       }
   }

   ====
   import static org.junit.Assert.*;

   import org.junit.*;

   import java.io.*;

   public class RunestoneTests extends CodeTestHelper
   {
       public RunestoneTests()
       {
           super("listRem");
       }

       @Test
       public void test1()
       {
           String output = getMethodOutput("main");
           String expect = "[1, 2, 3]\n[1, 3]";

           boolean passed = getResults(expect, output, "main()", true);
           assertTrue(passed);
       }
   }

.. note::

   The ``remove(int index)`` method will remove the object at the given index
   and shift left any values to the right of that index. It doesn't remove the
   object that matches the integer value given. In the example above it doesn't
   remove the value 1. It removes the value 2 at index 1.

.. mchoice:: qListRem
   :answer_a: [2, 3]
   :answer_b: [1, 2, 3]
   :answer_c: [1, 2]
   :answer_d: [1, 3]
   :correct: c
   :feedback_a: This would be true if it was <code>remove(0)</code>
   :feedback_b: The <code>remove</code> will remove a value from the list, so this can't be correct.
   :feedback_c: The 3 (at index 2) is removed
   :feedback_d: This would be true if it was <code>remove(1)</code>

   What will print when the following code executes?

   .. code-block:: java

      List<Integer> list1 = new ArrayList<Integer>();
      list1.add(1);
      list1.add(2);
      list1.add(3);
      list1.remove(2);
      System.out.println(list1);

You can step through the code above by clicking on the following `RemoveExample  <http://cscircles.cemc.uwaterloo.ca/java_visualize/#code=import+java.util.*%3B%0A%0Apublic+class+ClassNameHere+%7B%0A+++public+static+void+main(String%5B%5D+args)+%7B%0A++++++List%3CInteger%3E+list1+%3D+new+ArrayList%3CInteger%3E()%3B%0A++++++list1.add(new+Integer(1))%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(new+Integer(2))%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(new+Integer(3))%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.remove(2)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A+++%7D%0A%7D&mode=display&curInstr=0>`_.


``get(index)`` and ``set(index, obj)``
--------------------------------------

.. index::
    pair: arraylist; getting an item
    pair: arraylist; setting an item

You can get the object at an index using ``obj = listName.get(index)`` and set
the object at an index using ``listName.set(index,obj)``. Both methods require
that the index argument refer to an existing element of the list, i.e. the index
must be greater than or equal to 0 and less than the ``size()`` of the list.

Notice that ``ArrayList``\ s use ``get`` and ``set`` methods instead of the
index operator that we use with arrays: ``array[index]``. This is because
``ArrayList`` is a class with methods, not a built in type with special support
in the language like arrays.

|CodingEx| **Coding Exercise**

.. activecode:: listGetSet
   :language: java
   :autograde: unittest

   Try to guess what the code below will print before running it. Can you get the last element in the nameList to print it out? Can you set the first element in the list to your name and print out the list?
   ~~~~
   import java.util.*; // import all classes in this package.

   public class listGetSet
   {
       public static void main(String[] args)
       {
           ArrayList<String> nameList = new ArrayList<String>();
           nameList.add("Diego");
           nameList.add("Grace");
           nameList.add("Deja");
           System.out.println(nameList);
           System.out.println(nameList.get(0));
           System.out.println(nameList.get(1));
           nameList.set(1, "John");
           System.out.println(nameList);
       }
   }

   ====
   import static org.junit.Assert.*;

   import org.junit.*;

   import java.io.*;

   public class RunestoneTests extends CodeTestHelper
   {
       public RunestoneTests()
       {
           super("listGetSet");
       }

       @Test
       public void test1()
       {
           boolean passed =
                   checkCodeContainsRegex("nameList.set(0, \"Your name\")", "nameList.set(0, ");
           assertTrue(passed);
       }

       @Test
       public void test2()
       {
           String output = getMethodOutput("main");
           String searchString = "Deja";

           boolean passed =
                   output.contains("\n" + searchString)
                           || output.matches("\\s+" + searchString + "\\s+");

           passed = getResults("true", "" + passed, "Prints last item in list (Deja)", passed);
           assertTrue(passed);
       }
   }

|Exercise| **Check your understanding**

.. mchoice:: qListRem1
   :answer_a: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
   :answer_b: [1, 2, 4, 5, 6]
   :answer_c: [1, 2, 5, 4, 6]
   :answer_d: [1, 5, 2, 4, 6]
   :correct: c
   :feedback_a: The <code>set</code> will replace the item at index 2 so this can not be right.
   :feedback_b: The <code>add</code> with an index of 2 and a value of 5 adds the 5 at index 2 not 3. Remember that the first index is 0.
   :feedback_c: The <code>set</code> will change the item at index 2 to 4.  The add of 5 at index 2 will move everything else to the right and insert 5.  The last <code>add</code> will be at the end of the list.
   :feedback_d: The <code>add</code> with an index of 2 and a value of 5 adds the 5 at index 2 not 1. Remember that the first index is 0.

   What will print when the following code executes?

   .. code-block:: java

      List<Integer> list1 = new ArrayList<Integer>();
      list1.add(1);
      list1.add(2);
      list1.add(3);
      list1.set(2, 4);
      list1.add(2, 5);
      list1.add(6);
      System.out.println(list1);

You can step through the code above by clicking on the following `Example1 <http://cscircles.cemc.uwaterloo.ca/java_visualize/#code=import+java.util.*%3B%0A%0Apublic+class+ClassNameHere+%7B%0A+++public+static+void+main(String%5B%5D+args)+%7B%0A++++++%0A++++++ArrayList%3CInteger%3E+list1+%3D+new+ArrayList%3CInteger%3E()%3B%0A++++++list1.add(1)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(2)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(3)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.set(2,4)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(2,5)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(6)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++%0A+++%7D%0A%7D&mode=display&curInstr=0>`_.

.. mchoice:: qListRem2
   :answer_a: ["Sarah", "Destini", "Layla", "Sharrie"]
   :answer_b: ["Sarah", "Destini", "Anaya", "Layla", "Sharrie"]
   :answer_c: ["Anaya", "Sarah", "Sharrie"]
   :answer_d: ["Anaya", "Sarah", "Destini", "Sharrie"]
   :correct: d
   :feedback_a: Remember that the first index is 0 not 1.
   :feedback_b: <code>set</code> changes the value and the first index is 0 not 1.
   :feedback_c: <code>add</code> at index 1 adds the new value at that index but moves right any existing values.
   :feedback_d: The list is first ["Anaya", "Layla", "Sharrie"] and then changes to ["Anaya", Destini", "Sharrie"] and then to ["Anaya", "Sarah", "Destini", "Sharrie"]

   What will print when the following code executes?

   .. code-block:: java

      List<String> list1 = new ArrayList<String>();
      list1.add("Anaya");
      list1.add("Layla");
      list1.add("Sharrie");
      list1.set(1, "Destini");
      list1.add(1, "Sarah");
      System.out.println(list1);

You can step through the code above by clicking on the following `Example2 <http://cscircles.cemc.uwaterloo.ca/java_visualize/#code=import+java.util.*%3B%0A%0Apublic+class+ClassNameHere+%7B%0A+++public+static+void+main(String%5B%5D+args)+%7B%0A++++++%0A++++++List%3CString%3E+list1+%3D+new+ArrayList%3CString%3E()%3B%0A++++++list1.add(%22Anaya%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(%22Layla%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(%22Sharrie%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.set(1,+%22Destini%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++list1.add(1,+%22Sarah%22)%3B%0A++++++System.out.println(list1)%3B%0A++++++%0A+++%7D%0A%7D&mode=display&curInstr=0>`_.





Comparing arrays and ``ArrayList``\ s
-------------------------------------

When do you use arrays and when do you use ``ArrayList``\ s? Use an array when
you want to store several items of the same type and you know how many items
will be in the array and the items in the array won't change in order or number.
Use an ``ArrayList`` when you want to store several items of the same type and
you don't know how many items you will need in the list or when you want to
remove items from the list or add items to the list while the program is
running.

Here is a comparison of how to create arrays and ``ArrayList``\ s:

.. code-block:: java

   // arrays must specify a size!
   int[] highScores = new int[5];
   String[] names = new String[5];

   // ArrayLists are empty to start with
   ArrayList<Integer> highScoreList = new ArrayList<Integer>();
   ArrayList<String> nameList = new ArrayList<String>();

.. |comparison handout| raw:: html

   <a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1EzkHa3TNlbHOKVeZReQIf4HzuwwXsCAV/view?usp=sharing" target="_blank">comparison handout</a>

Here is a comparison of how to access and change elements in arrays and
``ArrayList``\ s. Note that ``ArrayList``\ s have a method ``size()`` instead of a
``length`` property, and ``ArrayList``\ s use ``get``/``set`` methods instead of
the index operator (``[]``).

=========== ========================  ========================
Operation   array                     ArrayList
=========== ========================  ========================
length/size array.length              list.size()
----------- ------------------------  ------------------------
Access      value = array[index];     value = list.get(index);
----------- ------------------------  ------------------------
Modify      array[index] = value;     list.set(index,value);
=========== ========================  ========================

Note that the ``ArrayList`` methods ``add`` and ``remove`` do not have a simple
equivalent in arrays because they change the number of elements in the list and
may shift the positions of other elements.

Here is a |comparison handout| of the basic operations to access 1-dimensional
and 2-dimensional arrays (which we will see in the next unit), ``ArrayList``\ s,
and ``String``\ s made by AP CSA teacher Sam Procopio of Bishop Blanchet High
School.

|Groupwork| Programming Challenge : Array to ArrayList
-------------------------------------------------------

.. activecode:: challenge-7-2-array-to-arraylist
   :language: java
   :autograde: unittest

   Rewrite the following code that uses an array to use an ``ArrayList``
   instead. In the comments write why you think an ``ArrayList`` is a better
   data structure to use than an array for this problem.

   ~~~~
   import java.util.*;

   public class ToDoList
   {
       public static void main(String[] args)
       {
           // Rewrite this code to use an ArrayList instead of an array
           String[] toDoList = new String[3];
           toDoList[0] = "Do homework";
           toDoList[1] = "Help make dinner";
           toDoList[2] = "Call grandma";

           // changing element 1
           toDoList[1] = "Order pizza";

           System.out.println(toDoList.length + " things to do!");
           System.out.println("Here's the first thing to do: " + toDoList[0]);

           // remove item 0 and move everything down
           //  (this can be done in one method call with ArrayList)
           toDoList[0] = toDoList[1];
           toDoList[1] = toDoList[2];
           toDoList[2] = "";

           System.out.println("Here's the next thing to do: " + toDoList[0]);

           // Why is an ArrayList better than an array for a toDoList?
           // Answer:
       }
   }

   ====
   import static org.junit.Assert.*;

   import org.junit.*;

   import java.io.*;

   public class RunestoneTests extends CodeTestHelper
   {
       public RunestoneTests()
       {
           super("ToDoList");
       }

       @Test
       public void test1()
       {
           String output = getMethodOutput("main");
           String expect =
                   "3 things to do!\n"
                       + "Here's the first thing to do: Do homework\n"
                       + "Here's the next thing to do: Order pizza";

           boolean passed = getResults(expect, output, "Output is the same");
           assertTrue(passed);
       }

       @Test
       public void test2()
       {
           String output = removeSpaces(getCode());
           String expect = "ArrayList<String>";

           boolean passed = output.contains(expect);

           passed = getResults("true", "" + passed, "Declare ArrayList", passed);
           assertTrue(passed);
       }

       @Test
       public void test3()
       {
           String expect = "[*]";

           boolean passed = checkCodeNotContains(expect);
           assertTrue(passed);
       }
   }

Summary
-----------


- The following ArrayList methods, including what they do and when they are used, are part of the Java Quick Reference:

  - **int size()** : Returns the number of elements in the list
  - **boolean add(E obj)** : Appends obj to end of list; returns true
  - **void add(int index, E obj)** : Inserts obj at position index (0 <= index <= size), moving elements at position index and higher to the right (adds 1 to their indices) and adds 1 to size
  - **remove(int index)** — Removes element from position index, moving elements at position index + 1 and higher to the left (subtracts 1 from their indices) and subtracts 1 from size; returns the element formerly at position index
  - **E get(int index)** : Returns the element at position index in the list
  - **E set(int index, E obj)** : Replaces the element at position index with obj; returns the element formerly at position index
